From the New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams and [music] this is The Daily.
[music]
As the federal government reverses
course on renewable energy projects
[music] and other policies related to
climate change, states, cities, and
local groups are stepping into the
breach. [music] Today, my colleagues
Cara Buckley and Katherine Einhorn on
their project to document small but
significant efforts to solve climate
[music]
and environmental problems in every
state in the country.
[music]
It's Friday, January 2nd.
Cara Katherine, happy new year.
>> Happy new year.
>> The two of you just completed this
really big and ambitious series, 50
states, 50 fixes. And I have to say it
is more, let's say, optimistic than the
types of stories we typically read in
our August pages. So I want to talk
about the origin of this. Tell me how
this series started. Cara, I'm going to
start with you. Right. So to answer your
question, I have to go back in time. I
used to be a culture reporter at the
paper. I was interviewing movie stars. I
was reporting on things like me too. But
throughout it all, especially in the
late 2010s, I was finding it really hard
to process all the negative climate news
we were hearing about the planet
overheating, species crashing, etc. You
were having a personal struggle.
>> I was having a personal struggle and I
just really didn't understand how people
were coping with it. M
>> and I thought well what can we do? What
can I do? And so I thought maybe I can
report this out but in a way that
focused on all these efforts that people
were doing to try and reverse climate
change. You know things that were having
an impact because a lot of things can
have an impact. So in 2021 I joined the
climate desk and my focus from the start
was on people that were doing things in
their communities that were working
which is kind of unusual in the sense
that we normally think of journalism as
writing about problems not about
solutions.
>> Right? So this kind of beat is kind of
looking at you know not the plane
crashes but the planes that are not only
successfully landing but doing it really
well.
An early story I did was about people
taking over old golf courses and rewing
them, which was helping biodiversity. I
did stories about roundabouts in Carmel,
Indiana, which are the most sustainable
types of intersections and reduce
emissions. And it was out of that
reporting that I did over three years, I
thought there's going to be a solution
in every state. I was hearing about some
of them and I thought let's set
ourselves a challenge and also go and
find out a distinct climate or
environmental success story in each one
of the 50 states. And Katherine, I
remember us talking a few years ago
right after you joined the climate and
the environment desk. And I think you
were also kind of concerned about how to
write about this topic in a way that
wouldn't always hit that same note of
existential dread that Cara is talking
about.
>> Yeah. I remember setting a goal for
myself that I would include a solution
in the story somewhere. Even if it was a
little bit at the bottom, I would at
least say what the solution was in every
story that I wrote. I don't know if I
totally succeeded, but I tried. But I
came to the climate desk to cover
biodiversity, so wildlife and
ecosystems. I cover extinction, right?
So, when I first heard about CARA
series, it was in January 2025
>> after the election, of course. And I was
really excited about it because we knew
that President Trump was going to be
dismantling a lot of climate policy,
environmental policy, environmental
regulation. I was so interested to focus
on the things that people will still be
doing, are doing, have been doing to
address things at the state, local,
tribal levels separately from the
federal government. I was really drawn
to this series because it seemed like
that's where a lot of the action was
going to be happening. So when you set
out to do this series, what was the
mandate? We wanted win-winwins. Multiple
wins.
>> Multiple wins. So it's not just
resilience. It's not just adaptation.
It's doing things that are reducing
greenhouse gas emissions that are making
ecosystems healthier that are helping
restore imperiled species. So we want at
the same time helping human health and
saving people money. Right. In a way
basically you're showing the
interconnectedness of our climate to our
economy to our health with the series.
It sounds like
>> precisely.
>> So at this point you have reported from
all 50 states. Congratulations. You have
traversed the country and
>> not just us to be fair. It wasn't just
the two of us. We had there was a whole
team of people that worked really hard
on this series including colleagues on
our desk and on national 50 plus
photographers.
>> 50 plus photographers and 13 reporters.
>> Okay, that is cool. I want to talk about
some of those stories. So let's start
with each of you telling me about one
that really stood out to you. maybe
because it had that multiple win or
downstream effects that you mentioned.
Cara, let's start with you. Yeah,
absolutely. So, one of the stories that
really popped for me was about a funeral
director in northwest Missouri. He lived
in one of the most rural counties in the
state. His name was Eric Chamberlain. He
runs a family funeral business. And he
had been worrying for a long time about
how his small town was getting smaller.
people were moving away and they weren't
coming back and he was just trying to
figure out like how could he help? Is
there anything to reverse the economic
misfortunes of the town? And he was at
work one day driving a hearse. He was
over the border in Iowa and he saw these
giant white blades of a wind turbine.
He'd never seen them before. He wanted
to pull over, but he was leading a
funeral procession so he did not. But he
began investigating it and he approached
the Department of Natural Resources at
the state and he said, "There's a lot of
wind in my neck of the woods. Can we
maybe look at putting in wind turbines
here?" He ended up setting in motion
this wind energy project. He convinced
local farmers to put wind turbines in
their fields. At first, there were just
four. And Eric told me he distinctly
remembers flipping on the switch in 2008
and watching the town's electricity
meter running backwards. Rockport
announced it was the first community in
the country to be producing more
electricity from wind energy than what
it needed. And this ended up acrewing.
More places in the county started
putting up wind turbines. Today there's
more than 340 throughout the county. It
supplies 50 permanent jobs. And really
crucially, the town has
a tax revenue base from these wind
turbines. $6 million a year. It's more
than half of the real estate tax revenue
for the county. And it's supplying extra
revenue for farmers who have wind
turbines, too. It fundamentally changed
the economy of this county. And it all
started with one guy. Wow. I want to
talk about one of the stories that
really stood out to me from your series.
I'm a dog person. This is a story where
dogs are the heroes. Can you guess which
one I'm talking about?
>> Montana.
>> Yes. Montana. You want to explain what
it is?
>> Yeah. Yeah. I knew that I wanted to
write about livestock guardian dogs, you
know, which are dogs that are bred to
protect livestock from predators like
coyotes
>> or grizzly bears
>> or grizzly bears in this case. And in
Montana, on the plains of Montana, they
have not been dealing with grizzly bears
for quite some time because because we
basically eradicated them from that
area. You know, they were eradicated
from much of the lower 48 states
>> because they're dangerous or
>> because they were shot. There were a lot
of predator campaigns in like the 1800s
to early 1900s and then laws were put
into place and these predators started
rebounding
>> to preserve them basically. So they
wouldn't go extinct.
>> So they wouldn't go extinct. Exactly.
And so these grizzlies have been slowly
walking back out to the plains of
Montana where there's no real
recollection of them in living memory.
And one of the things that they've
discovered is the wheat and barley
farms. And this is like really good
eating. If you're a grizzly bear, it's a
really nice, easy source of food for
them. And so these farmers, they never
had bears raiding their orchards. Now
all of a sudden there's bears stealing
their apples and raiding their grain
bins and they're scared to go outside,
certainly to let their children play
outside. [snorts] And in Montana there's
a man named Wesley Sarmment who at the
time was the bear manager for the state
wildlife department. So he's getting all
these calls from these farmers who are
just desperate because these bears keep
showing up on their property. And
Wesley's trying everything to get them
to go away, including trapping them, but
that's dangerous. He tried having
everyone clean up the grain very well,
but it was impossible because they're on
a working farm. He tried electrifying
the grain bins, which did work, but it
was really bad for the farm workers cuz
it was just really awkward and made
working a lot harder. And so then he
heard about a local farmer whose son
found a stray livestock guardian dog,
like a Pyrenees type dog, you know, that
often put out like with sheep to protect
them from coyotes or whatever. And to
everyone's surprise, this dog was
chasing bears away, including like
mother bears with cubs, grizzlies. And
so Wesley gets with this professor who
studies livestock guardian dogs.
>> And they decide to try this study where
the dogs were not guarding livestock.
They were basically guarding people.
They were guarding the farms. And they
get these big breeds, these Turkish
breeds like Kangles and Anatolian
Shepherds, and they they recruit farmers
to participate in this little tiny
study. And these dogs were just
transformative for the farmers. And like
the the beautiful thing about this story
is that these dogs were protecting the
people and they were protecting the
bears because if the bears are going to
threaten people's lives and livelihoods,
they're going to get themselves killed.
So the dogs were this tool for
coexistence and the families were really
in love with the dogs and more than one
farmer said the same thing which was
this dog would lay down his life for me.
>> What was your takeaway from this whole
experience in Montana and the solutions
that these people had come up with? It
was really striking how this little
idea, you know, cooked up by this bear
manager and this professor ended up
having these real results for these
farmers and then started spreading to
other farms because other other farmers
in the area were seeing how well it was
working. Huge reduction in bear visits
>> and so all of a sudden they were getting
dogs.
>> So that was one thing and that sort of
speaks to the whole series, right, is
about how these ideas can spread.
The other thing specific to the grizzly
bears is that they were really
rediscovering this ancient knowledge,
right? Wesley went into the whole thing.
He saw less conflict between Native
American communities and grizzlies. And
he thought that maybe that had to do
with all the dogs that kind of roam
around on the reservation.
And of course, he knew that in Europe
and Asia, these large dogs hundreds of
years ago were bred to chase bears,
right? And so he talked [music] about
how with the loss of these big predators
like grizzly bears over the last couple
hundred [music] years, you know, we
forgot about these methods of
coexistence.
And now as they're recovering, we're
having to relearn these ancient
practices [music] that had been
forgotten.
[music]
We'll be right back.
The two of you set yourselves up to find
stories from all 50 states. And I do
wonder if for any reason some states
were more challenging than others.
Obviously certain states just
legislatively, if not culturally perhaps
are more or less focused on things like
climate, on things like environment, on
things like conservation. For example, I
would imagine if you went to Portland,
you would be quite easy to find somebody
who would come up with a creative vegan
solution to something. By the way, I
didn't even know before I read your
story that there is such a thing as a
vegan tattoo parlor. So, that's a tease.
Anybody listening should just go read
that story. [laughter] But, I wonder,
did you find areas of the country that
were just harder to find folks who were
talking about any of these issues that
we've been discussing?
>> Yeah, Portland really boggles the mind
in terms of its vegan offerings. It's
home to a vegan strip club.
>> Wow.
>> Yeah. The dancers are not allowed wear
leather or feathers. I don't know if I'm
going to say their motto. It is saucy.
Tell it.
>> The motto is we put the meat on the
pole, not on the plate. As I said,
creative vegan solutions. But some of
the states were definitely harder than
others. And by the time we were working
through the series towards the end, we
had covered so many iterations of how to
tackle climate and environmental crisis
that we didn't want to do repeats. And
so there were challenges for sure, but
one of our best stories, one of my
favorite stories came from North Dakota,
which it was in our second last batch of
stories. And my colleague Sachi Milky
found a beautiful story there. She found
that the Standing Rock tribe was deep in
an effort to get EV chargers set up
throughout tribal lands. And just remind
us quickly, Standing Rock. We all know
that name because because of the Dakota
Access Pipeline protests, which were
national international news. They were
trying to stop a pipeline from going
through their land. And they had been
trying for years as well, concurrent to
that, to get off fossil fuels in their
tribal lands by embracing all these
clean energy projects. And more
recently, they've been putting up EV
chargers so you can drive, it's part of
a intertribal network, so you can drive
electric vehicles without ever having to
gas up as you drive through tribal
lands. I would imagine that installing
electric vehicle chargers is not an
inexpensive project, especially if I'm
not mistaken, the Standing Rock
Reservation, that is in an area where
there's a lot of poverty, right? That
was one of the issues with the Dakota
Access Pipeline is it was cutting
through this already sort of vulnerable
area. Where did they get the money for
this project? Right. Well, one major
source it was the Department of Energy
grants. They won a $6 million grant to
help fund this effort. So, that made
this possible. And as we spoke about at
the beginning of this conversation,
however, federal money, federal
initiatives for environment and climate
are going away or being dismantled. So I
just sort of wonder how does that affect
programs like this in the future? Yeah,
a lot of them are having to put things
on hold, you know. So in Fagetville,
Arkansas, where they've reduced methane
emissions from the landfill through
composting, they had two $20 million
climate resilience projects they had to
shove. But on the flip side, cities are
looking at things too that are under
their purview where they can save a lot
of money. And that was the case in
Pittsburgh when it decided to tackle
light pollution. Light pollution, a type
of pollution that I wonder how many
people actually think of as real
pollution. People don't think of it as
real pollution, but according to a 2023
study, it's growing globally at 10% a
year. Many places are overlit. You know,
we know that we're not supposed to have
exposure to blue light at night. Like,
we're staring at our computer screens.
We know.
>> Yes, we know that, but we don't do it.
But
>> we don't do it, but we [laughter] we
know we know it's having impact on our
melatonin levels. It's not just
impacting us. It's impacting pollinator
friendly species and birds and bats.
It's also interfering as global light
grows. It's interfering with processes
in the atmosphere that actually clean
the air
>> that need nighttime darkness according
to a study to literally filter out the
pollution.
>> Wow.
>> Yeah.
>> We're also using a ton of energy doing
it. And so in Pittsburgh, an astronomy
professor there, she wanted her students
to see the dark skies at night. and she
had been agitating trying to raise
awareness about the benefits of dimmer,
softer lights.
>> So, what did they come up with? So, they
came up with dimmable street lights that
certain city officials can dim from
their phones. Like, you can just swipe
across your phone if you're a city
official and turn down the intensity of
street lights at night. They also
designed street lights that have hoods
over them. So instead of the light
glaring upwards where it can disorient
birds and other flying animals, they're
hooded and just direct the light down.
And they also save money. The city
projects that it'll save 942,000
in energy costs a year and it'll prevent
12,000 metric tons of carbon dioxide
emissions each year. One thing that's
really striking me listening to these
stories also is that we have not talked
about politics once. These do not seem
like political problems or politicized
solutions. These seem like people in
their communities trying to figure out
how do I deal with a problem that is
affecting me specifically.
>> And I would imagine though that the
folks you talked to, I mean again you
went to all 50 states, you probably
encountered folks who all come from very
different perspectives and starting
points. So, I just sort of wonder what
if anything there is to say about the
politics of reporting on this. I'm going
to jump in with an example. Oklahoma has
restored more streams than any other
state. And part of the reason they were
able to do that is they were able to
convince farmers, especially beef
farmers, keep your cows out of the
streams. Fence off your cows. So this
farmer that had done this, he found that
because his cows weren't drinking crappy
water, they were putting on more weight,
his vet bills were going down, and they
were also because they weren't slip
sliding up and down the bank. The whole
bank had come back to life with
wildlife. Bald eagles were nesting. We
didn't talk about politics once. He was
talking about doing things that helped
his bottom line, helped his cows be
healthier, and helped nature. In the
same token, it was almost like in a lot
of our reporting, it I'm not going to
say it transcended politics,
>> but people want clean air. They want
clean water. They want beauty around
them. And that was like a throughine we
found in every single state we reported
on.
>> I do sort of wonder like maybe there was
no question in the communities that you
visited about what the problem was, but
I can imagine that maybe there was
debate about what the cause was,
especially especially as it related to
climate. And I how much did that factor
in to your conversations or even like
how much did the cause of things affect
the solutions that people were coming up
with for themselves?
>> I do think it's worth pointing out that
sometimes people didn't want to talk
about climate change. Like they almost
felt sometimes I'd be interviewing
people and they'd be scared to even use
the term climate change. M
>> and you know farmers and ranchers often
are experiencing climate change but they
either don't want to use that word or
they definitely don't want to talk about
it as human caused.
>> Why?
>> Because it's been politicized.
>> Because they didn't want blowback in
their communities or because they didn't
believe it or like
>> a combo I think.
>> Okay.
>> And there were people who didn't want to
talk to us. We had one story lined up
that we really loved. we really wanted
to tell it and then they talked amongst
themselves and they said we're really
scared of, you know, talking about it
because we don't want the federal
government to come after us because
we're talking about climate and because
we did get some funding from the federal
government and we don't want to imperil
it. So, you know, it it was nuanced. It
was complicated often times on the
ground. I wonder if your outlook on the
future has changed after spending so
much time with people who have been
thinking about fixes at this hyper local
level like how are you looking at sort
of the broader
bigger holistic problems that the
country or the planet faces?
Yeah, for me the answer is really
two-pronged. The big picture is very
scary as the big picture often is. I
mean, the crises we're facing, they're
real. They're mounting. They're hitting
some people disproportionately compared
to others. But then on the local level,
as we reported out these stories, as I
was seeing all the different ways
communities were tackling different
aspects of climate change, I couldn't
help but feel a little bit hopeful. Like
there are so many people all over the
country that are finding ways to work
with the planet rather than against it.
Katherine, you
>> it is really meaningful to spend time
with people who are working so hard to
make their communities better and I
really enjoyed that personally. But like
in a broader way, it makes me think of
something that Jane Goodall, you know,
the famous primatologist and
environmentalist who died in October,
something that she emphasized a lot,
especially toward the end of her life,
was that like every single day that we
live, we are making a difference. Our
actions are making a difference, and we
get to decide what kind of difference we
make.
>> [music]
>> And the people that we interviewed this
year for the series just embodied
[music] that. These people were really
living in that spirit.
Carla Buckley, Katherine Einhorn,
[music]
thank you both so much for being here.
>> Thank you. Thank you.
[music]
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know.
Today, [music]
Zoron Mandani was sworn in as mayor of
New York City just after midnight on
Thursday. In his inauguration speech, he
vowed to represent all New Yorkers, even
[music] the ones who may view his
administration with quote distrust or
disdain. If you are a New Yorker, I am
your mayor. [cheering]
[screaming]
>> Regardless of whether we agree, I will
protect you, celebrate with you, mourn
alongside you, and never, not for
[music] a second, hide from you. The
speech was peppered with references to
the working-class New Yorkers who helped
drive Mandani to city hall. The mayor
[music] called out people who drive
taxis, clean public parks, and serve, as
he put it, biryani and beef patties.
>> While Mamani has spent months reassuring
civic and business leaders of [music]
his pragmatism, he pledged to govern as
a democratic socialist, vowing to run
the city, quote, expansively and
audaciously. To those who insist that
the era of big government is over, hear
me when I say this. No longer will city
hall hesitate to use its power to
improve New Yorkers lives.
[cheering]
[music]
And Tatiana Schlober, an environmental
journalist and a daughter of Caroline
Kennedy, [music]
died on Tuesday.
Tatiana received a wave of attention
recently for a powerful essay she
published in the New Yorker [music]
about how she was diagnosed with
leukemia right after giving birth to her
daughter.
The essay was about her battle with a
rare form of the illness and also about
her [music] alarm at the changing
healthcare landscape for Americans.
But it was [music] also very personal.
It was about dying and it was about
parenting and [music] memory.
It begins when you are dying. At least
in my limited experience, [music] you
start remembering everything.
Some of us had the pleasure of working
with [music] Tatiana when she was a
reporter at the New York Times. And this
week, colleagues have been sharing their
own memories, how hard she worked,
[music] her intelligence and poise, and
also that she was very funny. Tatiana
Schllober was 35. [music]
Today's episode was produced by Alex
Stern and [music] Michael Simon Johnson.
It was edited by Patricia Willins with
help from Devon Taylor, contains [music]
music by Pat McCusker, and was
engineered by Alyssa Moxley and Chris
Wood.
The Dy's engineers [music] are Chris
Wood and Alyssa Moxley with engineering
support from Brad Fischer, Mattie
Masiello, Nick Pitman, [music] and Kyle
Grandillo. Our theme song is by Ben
Lansberg, and Jin Brumberg of Wonderly.
Our radio team is Jodie [music] Becker,
Rowan Nisto, Diane Wong, and Catherine
Anderson.
Alexander Lee Young is our deputy
executive [music] producer. Michael
Benois is our deputy editor. Paige
Cowittat is the editor of The Daily.
[music] Ben Calhoun is our executive
producer. Special thanks to Paula
Schuman, Lissa Anderson, Sam [music]
Dolnik, and to the founding editor of
the show, Lisa Tobin.
That's it for the Daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. [music] See you on Monday.